.nh
.TH gloat-java-interop -- Calling Java from Gloat
.SH Synopsis
Gloat understands the standard Clojure JVM-interop idioms (\fBMath/sqrt\fR,
\fBMath/PI\fR, and so on) and routes them to a Go-native port of the JVM
runtime called gojava. The goal is
that unmodified \fB\&.clj\fR source written for Clojure-on-the-JVM behaves the
same way when compiled by gloat, even where Go's standard library would
give a different answer.

.PP
The supported surface today is \fBjava.lang.Math\fR, \fBjava.lang.System\fR,
\fBjava.lang.Integer\fR, \fBjava.lang.Long\fR, \fBjava.lang.String\fR,
\fBjava.lang.Double\fR, \fBjava.lang.Boolean\fR, \fBjava.lang.Character\fR,
\fBjava.util.regex.Pattern\fR (with Matcher), and \fBjava.util.UUID\fR\&.
Other classes follow the same pattern as gojava grows.

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (println (Math/sqrt 144))            ; 12.0
  (println Math/PI)                    ; 3.141592653589793
  (println (Math/floorDiv -7 2)))      ; -4 (JVM floor semantics)
.EE

.PP
JVM-style and Go-style interop are additive: \fB(Math/sqrt x)\fR and
\fB(math.Sqrt x)\fR both compile and can appear in the same file.

.PP
Fully-qualified \fBjava.lang.X/y\fR symbols are also accepted and resolve
identically to the bare form, mirroring standard Clojure where
\fBjava.lang.*\fR is auto-imported. So \fB(java.lang.Math/abs -1)\fR and
\fB(Math/abs -1)\fR produce the same result. The same applies to
constructors: \fB(java.lang.Integer. 100)\fR and \fB(Integer. 100)\fR are
equivalent.

.PP
Every fresh namespace is also seeded with the registered host classes so
\fB(ns-imports *ns*)\fR returns the same kind of name->Class map that real
Clojure produces. The seeded set covers exactly the classes listed in
the Status section below; other names that real Clojure auto-imports
(e.g. \fBObject\fR, \fBThrowable\fR, \fBNumber\fR) are not yet included. Each seeded
value prints as its fully-qualified Java name (e.g.
\fB{Math java.lang.Math, UUID java.util.UUID, ...}\fR), and \fB(.getName c)\fR
returns the same FQ name, matching JVM Clojure output.

.SH How it works
JVM symbols flow through three layers:
.IP "  1." 5
\fBRewrite\fP -- the \fB\&.clj\fR -> \fB\&.glj\fR transform translates each
\fBMath/*\fR symbol to a fully-qualified Go reference into the bridge
package.
.IP "  2." 5
\fBBridge\fP -- small Go packages inside glojure
(\fBpkg/javacompat/math/\fR, \fBpkg/javacompat/system/\fR) that handle
JVM-specific semantics: polymorphic dispatch on argument type,
JVM-faithful rounding rules, exact-arithmetic overflow detection,
nil-on-unset env/property lookups, conversion of Go return values
into Clojure-friendly forms.
.IP "  3." 5
\fBgojava\fP -- the typed Go port of \fBjava.lang.*\fR, with one Go name
per JVM overload (\fBAbsInt\fR, \fBAbsLong\fR, \fBFloorDivInt\fR, \fBFloorDivLong\fR,
\&...).

.PP
At the REPL the rewrite step is skipped; each bridge registers its
symbols under the JVM-style \fBMath.<name>\fR and \fBSystem.<name>\fR keys in
glojure's pkgmap so \fB(Math/sqrt 144)\fR and \fB(System/getenv "PATH")\fR
resolve the same way without translation.

.SH Static method calls
Runnable: \fB01-static-method.clj\fR

.PP
\fBMath.sqrt(144)\fR on the JVM is \fB(Math/sqrt 144)\fR in Glojure. No import
is needed. Single-argument methods are the most common case; two-arg
forms work the same way.

.EX
(Math/sqrt 144)            ; 12.0
(Math/pow 2 10)            ; 1024.0
(Math/floor 2.7)           ; 2.0
(Math/ceil 2.3)            ; 3.0
.EE

.SH Static fields
Runnable: \fB02-static-field.clj\fR

.PP
Static fields are referenced as \fBClass/NAME\fR in non-call position. The
existing constants are \fBMath/PI\fR and \fBMath/E\fR\&.

.EX
Math/PI                    ; 3.141592653589793
Math/E                     ; 2.718281828459045
(Math/toRadians 180)       ; PI
.EE

.SH Polymorphic dispatch
Runnable: \fB03-polymorphic-dispatch.clj\fR

.PP
The JVM overloads \fBMath.abs\fR (and \fBmin\fR, \fBmax\fR, \fBfloorDiv\fR, \fBfloorMod\fR,
\fB*Exact\fR) on int, long, float, and double. Go has no overloading, so
gojava exposes typed names (\fBAbsInt\fR, \fBAbsLong\fR, etc.) and the bridge
picks the right one at runtime based on the actual value type. Integer
inputs return integers; double inputs return doubles.

.EX
(Math/abs -42)             ; 42      (long stays long)
(Math/abs -3.5)            ; 3.5     (double stays double)
(Math/max 7 3)             ; 7
(Math/max 7.0 3)           ; 7.0     (any double -> double)
.EE

.SH JVM-faithful semantics
Runnable: \fB04-jvm-semantics.clj\fR

.PP
Several \fBjava.lang.Math\fR operations have specific rounding or overflow
behaviour that is \fBnot\fP the same as what you would get from Go's
\fBmath\fR package or its arithmetic operators. The bridge guarantees the
JVM result.

.EX
(Math/round 2.5)           ; 3
(Math/round -2.5)          ; -2  (half-values round toward +Inf, JVM-style)
(Math/floorDiv -7 2)       ; -4  (floor semantics, vs Go's -7/2 = -3)
(Math/floorMod -7 2)       ; 1   (floor mod, vs Go's -7%2 = -1)
.EE

.SH Mixing with Go-style interop
Runnable: \fB05-dual-interop.clj\fR

.PP
JVM-style and Go-style forms coexist:

.EX
(Math/sqrt 144)            ; 12.0   (JVM-style; via the bridge)
(math.Sqrt 144)            ; 12.0   (Go stdlib; direct call)
(Math/abs -42)             ; 42     (polymorphic, returns long)
(math.Abs -42.0)           ; 42.0   (Go's math.Abs takes float64 only)
.EE

.PP
Use the JVM form when you want JVM-faithful semantics or when you are
porting Clojure source. Use the Go form when you want to call the Go
stdlib directly (or any third-party Go package).

.SH java.lang.System
Runnable: \fB06-system.clj\fR

.PP
The supported surface covers time, environment variables, system
properties, process exit, the standard streams, and a couple of
housekeeping helpers.

.EX
(System/currentTimeMillis)            ; ms since epoch (long)
(System/nanoTime)                     ; high-resolution time source (long)

(System/getenv "PATH")                ; value, or nil if unset
(System/getenv)                       ; full env as a Clojure map

(System/getProperty "user.home")      ; value, or nil
(System/getProperty "x" "fallback")   ; value, or "fallback"
(System/setProperty "k" "v")          ; returns previous value or nil
(System/clearProperty "k")            ; returns previous value or nil

(System/lineSeparator)                ; "\\n" on Unix, "\\r\\n" on Windows
(System/gc)                           ; runs Go's runtime.GC()
(System/exit 0)                       ; calls os.Exit
.EE

.PP
\fBSystem/getenv\fR follows JVM semantics: a missing variable returns \fBnil\fR,
not the empty string. \fBSystem/getProperty\fR works the same way, and the
two-argument form returns its default.

.PP
The property table is seeded with the JVM-style keys most often read by
Clojure code: \fBuser.home\fR, \fBuser.dir\fR, \fBos.name\fR, \fBfile.separator\fR,
\fBline.separator\fR, \fBpath.separator\fR\&. Use \fBsetProperty\fR to extend it.

.SS Standard streams
\fBSystem/out\fR, \fBSystem/err\fR, and \fBSystem/in\fR are thin wrappers over
\fBos.Stdout\fR, \fBos.Stderr\fR, and \fBos.Stdin\fR\&. They expose the most-reached-for
methods of \fBjava.io.PrintStream\fR / \fBjava.io.InputStream\fR\&. Glojure's
instance-method resolution capitalizes the first letter, so JVM-style
calls land on the Go method:

.EX
(.println System/out "hello")         ; -> os.Stdout.Println
(.print   System/err "oops")          ; -> os.Stderr.Print
(.printf  System/out "%d\\n" 42)       ; -> os.Stdout.Printf
(.flush   System/out)                 ; -> os.Stdout.Flush (best-effort)
(.read    System/in  buf)             ; -> os.Stdin.Read
.EE

.PP
Note that idiomatic Clojure code usually goes through \fB(println ...)\fR
and friends (which route via \fB*out*\fR), not the streams directly. The
streams are here for code that asks for them by name.

.SS Not yet supported
\fBarraycopy\fR, \fBidentityHashCode\fR, the security-manager / finalization
APIs. Open an issue if you have a Clojure codebase that needs any of
these.

.SH java.lang.Integer and java.lang.Long
Runnable: \fB07-integer-long.clj\fR

.PP
The boxed integer classes carry a fixed-width contract from the JVM:
\fBInteger\fR is 32 bits, \fBLong\fR is 64 bits.
That contract is preserved here, so \fBInteger/MAX_VALUE\fR is
\fB2147483647\fR (not Go's \fBmath.MaxInt\fR, which is 2^63-1 on 64-bit
platforms) and \fBInteger/parseInt\fR will refuse values that overflow
int32.

.EX
(Integer/parseInt "42")               ; -> 42 (int32)
(Integer/parseInt "1010" 2)           ; -> 10 (radix parsing)
(Integer/parseInt "ff" 16)            ; -> 255
(Long/parseLong "9999999999")         ; -> 9999999999 (int64)

Integer/MAX_VALUE                     ; -> 2147483647
Long/MAX_VALUE                        ; -> 9223372036854775807

(Integer/toBinaryString 42)           ; -> "101010"
(Integer/toHexString 255)             ; -> "ff"
(Long/toHexString 4096)               ; -> "1000"

(Integer/valueOf 7)                   ; -> 7
(Integer/valueOf "7")                 ; -> 7 (parses)
(Integer. 5)                          ; rewrites to (Integer/valueOf 5)
(Long.    "9999999999")               ; rewrites to (Long/valueOf "...")

(Integer/bitCount 0xFF)               ; -> 8
(Integer/numberOfLeadingZeros 1)      ; -> 31
(Integer/signum -5)                   ; -> -1
(Integer/max 3 7)                     ; -> 7
.EE

.PP
Constructor forms \fB(Integer. x)\fR and \fB(Long. x)\fR are rewritten at
compile time to the matching \fBvalueOf\fR, which accepts either a number
(coerced to int32 / int64) or a string (parsed as decimal). Parse
failures raise a runtime error with \fBNumberFormatException\fR in the
message, matching JVM behavior.

.SH java.lang.String
Runnable: \fB08-string.clj\fR

.PP
\fBString/*\fR statics rewrite to the javacompat bridge like \fBMath/*\fR does.
Instance methods (\fB(.length s)\fR, \fB(.toUpperCase s)\fR, \fB(.substring s 1
4)\fR, ...) take a different path: glojure has no Go-side methods on the
primitive \fBstring\fR type, so the bridge registers each JVM method with
the runtime, and \fBlang.FieldOrMethod\fR consults that registry when the
receiver is a Go string. The dispatch is case-insensitive on the first
letter so both the original (\fB\&.equals\fR) and the rewrite-renamed
(\fB\&.Equals\fR) spellings reach the same handler.

.EX
(.length "naïve")              ; 5 (UTF-16 code units, JVM semantics)
(.toUpperCase "hello")         ; "HELLO"
(.substring "hello world" 6)   ; "world"
(.indexOf "hello" "lo")        ; 3
(.replace "foobar" "oo" "OO")  ; "fOObar"
(.split "a,b,c" ",")           ; ["a" "b" "c"]
(.hashCode "hello")            ; 99162322  (JVM int32 algorithm)
(.trim "  hi  ")               ; "hi"      (ASCII whitespace only)
(.strip "  hi  ")              ; "hi"      (Unicode whitespace)

(String/format "%s=%d" "x" 42) ; "x=42"
(String/join "-" ["a" "b"])    ; "a-b"
(String/valueOf nil)           ; "null"
(String. "hello")              ; "hello"   (rewrites to valueOf)
.EE

.PP
The format string for \fBString/format\fR accepts \fB%n\fR (newline), \fB%b\fR
(boolean as "true"/"false"), and positional \fB%N$x\fR indices in addition
to Go's standard verbs. Regex methods (\fB\&.matches\fR, \fB\&.replaceAll\fR,
\fB\&.replaceFirst\fR, \fB\&.split\fR) compile their pattern through Go's \fBregexp\fR
package; the supported syntax is Go's RE2, not Java's regex.

.SH java.lang.Double
Runnable: \fB09-double.clj\fR

.PP
\fBDouble/*\fR covers the static surface of the boxed double: parsing,
predicates, comparison, and bit-level conversion. Values are float64
to match Java's double precision.

.EX
(Double/parseDouble "3.14")            ; 3.14
(Double/valueOf "2.5")                 ; 2.5  (string overload)
(Double/valueOf 4.0)                   ; 4.0  (numeric overload)

(Double/isNaN Double/NaN)              ; true
(Double/isInfinite Double/POSITIVE_INFINITY) ; true
(Double/isFinite 1.5)                  ; true

(Double/toString Double/MAX_VALUE)     ; "1.7976931348623157E308"
(Double/toString Double/NaN)           ; "NaN"
(Double/toString Double/POSITIVE_INFINITY) ; "Infinity"

(Double/max 3.0 7.0)                   ; 7.0
(Double/compare 1.0 2.0)               ; -1

(Double/doubleToLongBits 1.0)          ; 4607182418800017408
(Double/longBitsToDouble 4607182418800017408) ; 1.0

(Double. "1.25")                       ; 1.25 (rewrites to valueOf)
.EE

.PP
\fBDouble/toString\fR is JVM-faithful: mantissa always carries a decimal
point (\fB"1.0"\fR, not \fB"1"\fR), the exponent is uppercase \fBE\fR with no \fB+\fR
sign on positive exponents, and the special values render as \fB"NaN"\fR,
\fB"Infinity"\fR, and \fB"-Infinity"\fR\&. Glojure's \fBprintln\fR formats float64
infinities as \fB##Inf\fR / \fB##-Inf\fR; route through \fBDouble/toString\fR when
you want the JVM spelling.

.SH java.lang.Boolean
Runnable: \fB10-boolean.clj\fR

.PP
\fBBoolean/*\fR exposes the static surface. \fBparseBoolean\fR and \fBvalueOf\fR
follow the JVM's lenient rule: they return \fBtrue\fR only when the input
equals \fB"true"\fR ignoring case, and \fBfalse\fR for every other value
including the empty string and nil.

.EX
(Boolean/parseBoolean "TRUE")          ; true   (case insensitive)
(Boolean/parseBoolean "yes")           ; false  (anything else)
(Boolean/valueOf "True")               ; true
(Boolean/valueOf true)                 ; true

(Boolean/toString true)                ; "true"
(Boolean/compare false true)           ; -1

(Boolean/logicalAnd true false)        ; false
(Boolean/logicalOr  true false)        ; true
(Boolean/logicalXor true true)         ; false

Boolean/TRUE                           ; true
Boolean/FALSE                          ; false

(Boolean. "true")                      ; true   (rewrites to valueOf)
.EE

.PP
The logical combinators are present so callers porting code that uses
them as point-free functions (e.g. \fB(reduce Boolean/logicalAnd ...)\fR)
don't have to rewrite to \fB(and ...)\fR\&. \fBBoolean/getBoolean\fR looks up a
system property by name; in gloat it falls back to the process
environment when no property is set.

.SH java.lang.Character
Runnable: \fB11-character.clj\fR

.PP
\fBCharacter/*\fR covers the static predicates, case folding, and
radix-aware digit conversion. Glojure's character literal (\fB\\a\fR, \fB\\5\fR,
\fB\\space\fR) parses to \fBlang.Char\fR (a rune wrapper); the bridge unwraps
it, so you can pass either a \fB\\c\fR literal or a plain integer code
point.

.EX
(Character/isDigit \\5)                 ; true
(Character/isLetter \\x)                ; true
(Character/isWhitespace \\tab)          ; true
(Character/isAlphabetic \\z)            ; true

(Character/toUpperCase \\a)             ; \\A
(Character/toLowerCase \\Z)             ; \\z
(Character/toString \\k)                ; "k"

(Character/digit \\f 16)                ; 15
(Character/digit \\z 10)                ; -1  (out of radix)
(Character/forDigit 10 16)             ; \\a
(Character/getNumericValue \\7)         ; 7
(Character/compare \\a \\b)              ; -1

Character/MIN_RADIX                    ; 2
Character/MAX_RADIX                    ; 36

(Character. \\W)                        ; \\W   (rewrites to valueOf)
.EE

.PP
Classification uses Go's \fBunicode\fR package, which tracks the same
categories the JVM uses; predicates like \fBisLetter\fR and \fBisDigit\fR
match the JVM result for the BMP code points typically encountered.
\fBisWhitespace\fR follows the JVM's quirk of accepting tab/newline/
form-feed/carriage-return/\fB0x1c-1f\fR while explicitly \fIexcluding\fP the
no-break spaces that \fBisSpaceChar\fR accepts.

.SH java.util.regex.Pattern
Runnable: \fB12-regex.clj\fR

.PP
\fBPattern/*\fR covers the static factories, the Matcher API, and the
flag constants. The underlying engine is Go's \fBregexp\fR (RE2), so a
few JVM features are unavailable: possessive quantifiers (\fB*+\fR,
\fB++\fR, \fB?+\fR), backreferences (\fB\\1\fR, \fB\\k<name>\fR), and lookaround
(\fB(?=...)\fR, \fB(?!...)\fR). Java-style named groups (\fB(?<name>...)\fR) are
translated to RE2's \fB(?P<name>...)\fR form before compilation, so the
Java syntax works.

.EX
(Pattern/matches "\\\\d+" "12345")           ; true

(let [p (Pattern/compile "(\\\\d+)-(\\\\w+)")
      m (.matcher p "42-foo")]
  (.find m)                                ; true
  (.group m)                               ; "42-foo"
  (.group m 1)                             ; "42"
  (.group m 2))                            ; "foo"

(let [p (Pattern/compile "HELLO" Pattern/CASE_INSENSITIVE)
      m (.matcher p "hello world")]
  (.find m))                               ; true

(let [p (Pattern/compile "\\\\s+")]
  (vec (.split p "foo  bar\\tbaz")))        ; ["foo" "bar" "baz"]

(Pattern/quote "a.b*c")                    ; "a\\\\.b\\\\*c"
(.pattern (Pattern. "x+"))                 ; "x+"  (ctor sugar)
.EE

.PP
Matcher instance methods (\fB\&.find\fR, \fB\&.group\fR, \fB\&.start\fR, \fB\&.end\fR,
\fB\&.matches\fR, \fB\&.lookingAt\fR, \fB\&.replaceAll\fR, \fB\&.replaceFirst\fR,
\fB\&.groupCount\fR, \fB\&.reset\fR) reach through reflection on the Go \fB*Matcher\fR
receiver. The matcher is stateful between \fB\&.find\fR calls, mirroring
the JVM. Pattern flags (\fBCASE_INSENSITIVE\fR, \fBMULTILINE\fR, \fBDOTALL\fR,
\fBLITERAL\fR, \fBUNICODE_CASE\fR) compile down to the corresponding RE2
inline modifiers or to \fBregexp.QuoteMeta\fR for \fBLITERAL\fR\&.

.SH java.util.UUID
Runnable: \fB13-uuid.clj\fR

.PP
\fBUUID/*\fR covers the random and name-based factories, parsing,
ordering, hashing, and the two-long constructor. Random UUIDs are
RFC 4122 v4 (\fBcrypto/rand\fR); name-based UUIDs are v3 (MD5 of the
raw input bytes, matching \fBUUID.nameUUIDFromBytes\fR exactly).

.EX
(let [u (UUID/randomUUID)]
  (.version u)                             ; 4
  (.variant u)                             ; 2
  (.toString u))                           ; "<hex>-<hex>-4<hex>...-..."

(let [u (UUID/fromString "01234567-89ab-cdef-0123-456789abcdef")]
  (.getMostSignificantBits u)              ; 81985529216486895
  (.getLeastSignificantBits u))            ; 81985529216486895

(.toString (UUID/nameUUIDFromBytes (.getBytes "hello")))
;; "5d41402a-bc4b-3a76-b971-9d911017c592"  (matches JVM)

(let [u (UUID. 42 99)]                     ; ctor sugar to fromBits
  (.toString u))                           ; "00000000-0000-002a-0000-000000000063"

(.compareTo (UUID. 1 2) (UUID. 1 3))       ; -1
(.hashCode (UUID/fromString "..."))        ; JVM XOR-and-fold algorithm
.EE

.PP
Instance methods reach through reflection on the Go \fB*UUID\fR
receiver. The Go type implements \fBfmt.Stringer\fR, so \fB(str u)\fR and
\fBprintln u\fR yield the canonical hex form. The fully qualified
\fBjava.util.UUID/...\fR form also resolves through the bridge for most
calls; a few of clojure.core's internal \fB(java.util.UUID/fromString s)\fR
and \fB(java.util.UUID/randomUUID)\fR call sites still resolve to
glojure's existing \fBgoogle/uuid\fR implementation for back-compat with
the stdlib \fBuuid?\fR predicate.

.SH java.lang.Thread
Runnable: \fB14-thread.clj\fR

.PP
Only \fBThread/sleep\fR is wired today. The full Java Thread API (\fBstart\fR,
\fBjoin\fR, \fBinterrupt\fR, names, uncaught handlers) has no direct goroutine
analogue and is intentionally out of scope. \fBThread/sleep\fR itself is
trivial: gojava forwards to \fBtime.Sleep\fR\&.

.EX
(Thread/sleep 50)                            ; sleep 50 ms
(Thread/sleep 1 500000)                      ; millis + nanos overload
(java.lang.Thread/sleep 1)                   ; fully qualified resolves
.EE

.PP
Negative millis or out-of-range nanoseconds panic, matching the JVM's
\fBIllegalArgumentException\fR\&. There is no \fBInterruptedException\fR: gojava
never interrupts a sleeping goroutine.

.SH java.time.Instant
Runnable: \fB15-instant.clj\fR

.PP
\fBInstant/*\fR covers the wall-clock factory (\fBnow\fR), the ISO-8601 parser
(\fBparse\fR), the two epoch factories (\fBofEpochSecond\fR 1+2-arg,
\fBofEpochMilli\fR), and the \fBEPOCH\fR constant. Instance methods cover the
seconds/nanos accessors, the \fBtoEpochMilli\fR reverse conversion,
comparison (\fBcompareTo\fR, \fBequals\fR, \fBisBefore\fR, \fBisAfter\fR), \fBhashCode\fR,
and the six \fBplus\fR/\fBminus\fR arithmetic methods (\fBSeconds\fR, \fBMillis\fR,
\fBNanos\fR).

.EX
(.toString Instant/EPOCH)                  ; "1970-01-01T00:00:00Z"
(.toString (Instant/now))                  ; "2026-05-24T17:42:08.123Z"

(let [i (Instant/parse "2007-12-03T10:15:30.500Z")]
  (.getEpochSecond i)                      ; 1196676930
  (.getNano i)                             ; 500000000
  (.toEpochMilli i)                        ; 1196676930500
  (.toString (.plusMillis i 1500)))        ; "2007-12-03T10:15:32Z"

(.toString (Instant/ofEpochSecond 0 1500000000))
;; "1970-01-01T00:00:01.500Z"  (nano-adjustment normalised)

(.compareTo (Instant/parse "2007-12-03T10:15:30Z")
            (Instant/parse "2007-12-03T10:15:31Z"))   ; -1
.EE

.PP
\fBtoString\fR matches Java's grouped output: no fraction when nanos is 0,
otherwise the shortest of 3 (millis), 6 (micros), or 9 (nanos) digits
that exactly represents the value. The Go type implements \fBfmt.Stringer\fR,
so \fB(str i)\fR and \fBprintln i\fR produce the same canonical form. Instant
has no public constructor on the JVM, so there is no \fB(Instant. ...)\fR
sugar.

.SH Supported symbols
.SS java.lang.Math (complete)
.IP \(bu 2
Constants: \fBMath/PI\fR, \fBMath/E\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Powers and roots: \fBMath/sqrt\fR, \fBMath/cbrt\fR, \fBMath/pow\fR, \fBMath/exp\fR,
\fBMath/expm1\fR, \fBMath/log\fR, \fBMath/log10\fR, \fBMath/log1p\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Trigonometry: \fBMath/sin\fR, \fBMath/cos\fR, \fBMath/tan\fR, \fBMath/asin\fR,
\fBMath/acos\fR, \fBMath/atan\fR, \fBMath/atan2\fR, \fBMath/sinh\fR, \fBMath/cosh\fR,
\fBMath/tanh\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Conversion: \fBMath/toRadians\fR, \fBMath/toDegrees\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Rounding: \fBMath/floor\fR, \fBMath/ceil\fR, \fBMath/round\fR, \fBMath/rint\fR,
\fBMath/signum\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Sign/magnitude: \fBMath/abs\fR, \fBMath/copySign\fR, \fBMath/hypot\fR,
\fBMath/IEEEremainder\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Min/max: \fBMath/min\fR, \fBMath/max\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Floor div/mod: \fBMath/floorDiv\fR, \fBMath/floorMod\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Exact arithmetic: \fBMath/addExact\fR, \fBMath/subtractExact\fR,
\fBMath/multiplyExact\fR, \fBMath/negateExact\fR, \fBMath/incrementExact\fR,
\fBMath/decrementExact\fR, \fBMath/toIntExact\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Random: \fBMath/random\fR

.SS java.lang.System
.IP \(bu 2
Time: \fBSystem/currentTimeMillis\fR, \fBSystem/nanoTime\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Environment: \fBSystem/getenv\fR (0-arg map, 1-arg lookup)
.IP \(bu 2
Properties: \fBSystem/getProperty\fR (1+2 arg), \fBSystem/setProperty\fR,
\fBSystem/clearProperty\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Lifecycle: \fBSystem/exit\fR, \fBSystem/gc\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Misc: \fBSystem/lineSeparator\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Streams: \fBSystem/out\fR, \fBSystem/err\fR, \fBSystem/in\fR (with \fB\&.println\fR,
\fB\&.print\fR, \fB\&.printf\fR, \fB\&.flush\fR, \fB\&.write\fR, \fB\&.read\fR)

.SS java.lang.Integer
.IP \(bu 2
Constants: \fBInteger/MIN_VALUE\fR, \fBInteger/MAX_VALUE\fR, \fBInteger/SIZE\fR,
\fBInteger/BYTES\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Parsing: \fBInteger/parseInt\fR (1+2 arg), \fBInteger/parseUnsignedInt\fR,
\fBInteger/valueOf\fR (int or string)
.IP \(bu 2
Constructor: \fB(Integer. x)\fR (rewrites to \fBvalueOf\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
Formatting: \fBInteger/toString\fR (1+2 arg), \fBInteger/toBinaryString\fR,
\fBInteger/toOctalString\fR, \fBInteger/toHexString\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Bit operations: \fBInteger/bitCount\fR, \fBInteger/numberOfLeadingZeros\fR,
\fBInteger/numberOfTrailingZeros\fR, \fBInteger/highestOneBit\fR,
\fBInteger/lowestOneBit\fR, \fBInteger/reverse\fR, \fBInteger/reverseBytes\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Comparisons: \fBInteger/compare\fR, \fBInteger/max\fR, \fBInteger/min\fR,
\fBInteger/signum\fR, \fBInteger/sum\fR

.SS java.lang.Long
Same surface as \fBjava.lang.Integer\fR, with \fBLong/\fR prefixes and int64
return types. Includes \fBLong/MIN_VALUE\fR, \fBLong/MAX_VALUE\fR,
\fBLong/parseLong\fR, \fBLong/valueOf\fR, \fBLong/toBinaryString\fR,
\fBLong/toHexString\fR, \fBLong/bitCount\fR, etc.

.SS java.lang.String
.IP \(bu 2
Statics: \fBString/format\fR, \fBString/join\fR, \fBString/valueOf\fR,
\fBString/copyValueOf\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Constructor: \fB(String. x)\fR (rewrites to \fBvalueOf\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
Length and predicates: \fB\&.length\fR, \fB\&.isEmpty\fR, \fB\&.isBlank\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Case: \fB\&.toUpperCase\fR, \fB\&.toLowerCase\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Trimming: \fB\&.trim\fR, \fB\&.strip\fR, \fB\&.stripLeading\fR, \fB\&.stripTrailing\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Substrings: \fB\&.substring\fR (1+2 arg), \fB\&.charAt\fR, \fB\&.codePointAt\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Search: \fB\&.indexOf\fR, \fB\&.lastIndexOf\fR (string or char, with optional
from-index), \fB\&.startsWith\fR (1+2 arg), \fB\&.endsWith\fR, \fB\&.contains\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Compare: \fB\&.equals\fR, \fB\&.equalsIgnoreCase\fR, \fB\&.compareTo\fR,
\fB\&.compareToIgnoreCase\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Build: \fB\&.concat\fR, \fB\&.repeat\fR, \fB\&.replace\fR (char or string),
\fB\&.replaceAll\fR, \fB\&.replaceFirst\fR, \fB\&.matches\fR, \fB\&.split\fR (1+2 arg)
.IP \(bu 2
Convert: \fB\&.toCharArray\fR, \fB\&.getBytes\fR, \fB\&.chars\fR, \fB\&.codePoints\fR,
\fB\&.lines\fR, \fB\&.toString\fR, \fB\&.intern\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Hash: \fB\&.hashCode\fR (JVM int32 algorithm)

.SS java.lang.Double
.IP \(bu 2
Constants: \fBDouble/MIN_VALUE\fR, \fBDouble/MAX_VALUE\fR, \fBDouble/MIN_NORMAL\fR,
\fBDouble/POSITIVE_INFINITY\fR, \fBDouble/NEGATIVE_INFINITY\fR, \fBDouble/NaN\fR,
\fBDouble/SIZE\fR, \fBDouble/BYTES\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Parsing: \fBDouble/parseDouble\fR, \fBDouble/valueOf\fR (string or number)
.IP \(bu 2
Constructor: \fB(Double. x)\fR (rewrites to \fBvalueOf\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
Formatting: \fBDouble/toString\fR (JVM-style), \fBDouble/toHexString\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Predicates: \fBDouble/isNaN\fR, \fBDouble/isInfinite\fR, \fBDouble/isFinite\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Bit conversion: \fBDouble/doubleToLongBits\fR,
\fBDouble/doubleToRawLongBits\fR, \fBDouble/longBitsToDouble\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Comparisons: \fBDouble/compare\fR, \fBDouble/max\fR, \fBDouble/min\fR, \fBDouble/sum\fR

.SS java.lang.Boolean
.IP \(bu 2
Constants: \fBBoolean/TRUE\fR, \fBBoolean/FALSE\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Parsing: \fBBoolean/parseBoolean\fR, \fBBoolean/valueOf\fR (string or boolean)
.IP \(bu 2
Constructor: \fB(Boolean. x)\fR (rewrites to \fBvalueOf\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
Formatting: \fBBoolean/toString\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Logical: \fBBoolean/logicalAnd\fR, \fBBoolean/logicalOr\fR, \fBBoolean/logicalXor\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Properties: \fBBoolean/getBoolean\fR (falls back to the process env)
.IP \(bu 2
Comparison: \fBBoolean/compare\fR

.SS java.lang.Character
.IP \(bu 2
Constants: \fBCharacter/MIN_VALUE\fR, \fBCharacter/MAX_VALUE\fR,
\fBCharacter/MIN_RADIX\fR, \fBCharacter/MAX_RADIX\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Constructor: \fB(Character. c)\fR (rewrites to \fBvalueOf\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
Predicates: \fBCharacter/isDigit\fR, \fBCharacter/isLetter\fR,
\fBCharacter/isLetterOrDigit\fR, \fBCharacter/isAlphabetic\fR,
\fBCharacter/isWhitespace\fR, \fBCharacter/isSpaceChar\fR,
\fBCharacter/isUpperCase\fR, \fBCharacter/isLowerCase\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Case folding: \fBCharacter/toUpperCase\fR, \fBCharacter/toLowerCase\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Conversion: \fBCharacter/toString\fR, \fBCharacter/digit\fR,
\fBCharacter/forDigit\fR, \fBCharacter/getNumericValue\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Comparison: \fBCharacter/compare\fR

.SS java.util.regex.Pattern
.IP \(bu 2
Statics: \fBPattern/compile\fR (1+2 arg), \fBPattern/matches\fR, \fBPattern/quote\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Constructor: \fB(Pattern. regex)\fR (rewrites to \fBcompile\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
Flag constants: \fBPattern/CASE_INSENSITIVE\fR, \fBPattern/MULTILINE\fR,
\fBPattern/LITERAL\fR, \fBPattern/DOTALL\fR, \fBPattern/UNICODE_CASE\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Pattern instance: \fB\&.pattern\fR, \fB\&.flags\fR, \fB\&.toString\fR, \fB\&.matcher\fR,
\fB\&.split\fR (1+2 arg), \fB\&.asPredicate\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Matcher instance: \fB\&.matches\fR, \fB\&.lookingAt\fR, \fB\&.find\fR (0+1 arg),
\fB\&.group\fR (0+1 arg, by index or name), \fB\&.start\fR (0+1 arg),
\fB\&.end\fR (0+1 arg), \fB\&.groupCount\fR, \fB\&.replaceAll\fR, \fB\&.replaceFirst\fR,
\fB\&.reset\fR (0+1 arg), \fB\&.pattern\fR

.SS java.util.UUID
.IP \(bu 2
Statics: \fBUUID/randomUUID\fR, \fBUUID/fromString\fR, \fBUUID/nameUUIDFromBytes\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Constructor: \fB(UUID. msb lsb)\fR (rewrites to \fBfromBits\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
Instance: \fB\&.toString\fR, \fB\&.getMostSignificantBits\fR,
\fB\&.getLeastSignificantBits\fR, \fB\&.version\fR, \fB\&.variant\fR, \fB\&.compareTo\fR,
\fB\&.equals\fR, \fB\&.hashCode\fR

.SS java.lang.Thread
.IP \(bu 2
Statics: \fBThread/sleep\fR (1-arg millis, 2-arg millis+nanos)

.PP
Instance methods (\fBstart\fR, \fBjoin\fR, \fBinterrupt\fR, \fBgetName\fR,
\fBcurrentThread\fR, ...) are not supported.

.SS java.time.Instant
.IP \(bu 2
Statics: \fBInstant/now\fR, \fBInstant/parse\fR, \fBInstant/ofEpochSecond\fR
(1+2 arg), \fBInstant/ofEpochMilli\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Constant: \fBInstant/EPOCH\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Instance: \fB\&.toString\fR, \fB\&.getEpochSecond\fR, \fB\&.getNano\fR,
\fB\&.toEpochMilli\fR, \fB\&.compareTo\fR, \fB\&.equals\fR, \fB\&.isBefore\fR, \fB\&.isAfter\fR,
\fB\&.hashCode\fR, \fB\&.plusSeconds\fR, \fB\&.plusMillis\fR, \fB\&.plusNanos\fR,
\fB\&.minusSeconds\fR, \fB\&.minusMillis\fR, \fB\&.minusNanos\fR

.SH Status
\fBjava.lang.Math\fR, \fBjava.lang.System\fR, \fBjava.lang.Integer\fR,
\fBjava.lang.Long\fR, \fBjava.lang.String\fR, \fBjava.lang.Double\fR,
\fBjava.lang.Boolean\fR, \fBjava.lang.Character\fR, \fBjava.lang.Thread\fR
(\fBsleep\fR only), \fBjava.util.regex.Pattern\fR (with Matcher),
\fBjava.util.UUID\fR, and \fBjava.time.Instant\fR are usable. \fBjava.lang.Class\fR,
\fBjava.io.File\fR, \fBjava.lang.Throwable\fR, and other commonly-used classes
are on the roadmap and will follow the same three-layer pattern.
