'\" t
.nh
.TH gloat - Glojure AOT Tool
Gloat compiles Clojure or
YAMLScript to Go code or native
binaries

.PP
.RS

.PP
Cross-compiles to 20+ platforms including Wasm.

.RE

.SH Synopsis
Before using the \fBTry Gloat - Live Demo\fP badge above, read the
Gloat Live Demo section below.

.EX
# Compile to native binary (default)
gloat app.clj                   # Creates ./app binary
gloat app.clj -o myapp          # Creates ./myapp binary

# Output intermediate formats
gloat app.ys -t clj             # Clojure to stdout
gloat app.ys -t glj             # Glojure to stdout
gloat app.ys -t go              # Go to stdout

# Create files with -t .ext shorthand
gloat app.ys -t .clj            # Creates app.clj
gloat app.ys -t .glj            # Creates app.glj
gloat app.ys -t .go             # Creates app.go

# Create a portable Go project directory
gloat app.ys -o build/          # Creates build/ directory

# Cross-compile
gloat app.ys -o app-linux --platform=linux/amd64
gloat app.ys -o app.exe --platform=windows/amd64

# Compile and run
gloat --run app.ys              # Compile and run (no binary kept)
gloat --run app.ys -- <args...> # Pass arguments to program

# Start the Glojure REPL
gloat --repl                    # Auto-detects ./gljdeps.edn
gloat --repl=mydir              # Use mydir/ as build directory
gloat --repl --deps=gljdeps.edn # Explicit deps file

# WebAssembly targets
gloat app.ys -o app.wasm        # WASI target
gloat app.ys -o app.wasm -t js  # JavaScript target
.EE

.SH Description
Gloat compiles Clojure or YAMLScript source files to any of these forms:
.IP \(bu 2
Native binaries
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Cross compile to 20+ OS/Arch environments
.RE
.IP \(bu 2
Web Assembly
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Wasi P1 - Run on server
.IP \(bu 2
JS Wasm - Run in browser
.RE
.IP \(bu 2
Shared libraries (\fB\&.so\fR, \fB\&.dylib\fR, \fB\&.dll\fR)
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
With \fB\&.h\fR header files for FFI binding
.RE
.IP \(bu 2
Go source files
.IP \(bu 2
Standalone Go build directories
.IP \(bu 2
Standalone Babashka (Clojure) files

.EX
\&.ys  →  ys -c   →  .clj
                    ↓
\&.clj  ────────→  rewrite  →  .glj
                              ↓
\&.glj  ──────────────────→  glj compile  →  .go
                                            ↓
                                       go build  →  binary/wasm
.EE

.PP
The tool has \fBzero external dependencies\fP\&.
All required tools (bb, glj, go, ys) are installed the first time you run
\fBgloat\fR via the Makes build system.

.PP
All of these tools will be installed local to the gloat repository under
\fB/path/to/gloat/.cache/.local/\fR and you will be prompted about it first.

.SH Gloat Live Demo
The gloat repository comes with a lot of demo programs.
You can find them in the \fBdemo/clojure/\fR, \fBdemo/yamlscript/\fR, and
\fBdemo/interop/\fR directories.

.PP
A great way to view the demos is to start the Gloat Demo Webpage Server with:

.EX
$ make serve-demo
\&...some output...
Starting server on http://localhost:8080
Press Ctrl+C to stop
.EE

.PP
That serves a webpage that will let you try all of the examples interactively.

.PP
In the webpage you can choose an example and then click \fBCompile\fP, which
sends it back to the local server, turns it into a Wasm file that can run in
the browser.
It will also show you the Glojure and the Go code that was generated to create
the Wasm.
After a program compiles, you can run it with the \fBRun\fP button.

.SS Run the Demo Now!
At the top of this file, you may have noticed this badge:
GitHub users can click that and see the demo without cloning this repository.
It opens in a GitHub Codespaces session, which starts as an empty VScode editor
session.
If you \fBwait a couple minutes (literally)\fP the demo will start in an editor
pane.

.PP
.RS

.PP
\fBNotes:\fP
The demo page \fBliterally takes 1-2 minutes to start\fP\&.
Use Cmd/Ctrl + Shift + P -> View Creation Log to see full logs.
After the demo starts in the editor, you can pop it out to a separate browser
pane.

.RE

.SS Using \fBgloat --run\fR to run examples
Try these:

.EX
gloat --run demo/yamlscript/dragon-curve.ys
gloat -r demo/clojure/even-or-odd.clj -- 7 42 31337
.EE

.PP
To pass options to a program run with \fBgloat --run\fR, put the after a \fB--\fR arg.

.SH Shared Library Bindings
Gloat can compile YAMLScript to shared libraries (\fB\&.so\fR/\fB\&.dylib\fR/\fB\&.dll\fR)
with auto-generated C header files, enabling FFI (Foreign Function Interface)
bindings from \fB23 programming languages\fP\&.

.PP
The \fBdemo/so-bindings/\fR directory
contains working examples for every supported language, all calling the same
shared library compiled from a single YAMLScript source file
(\fBdemo/so-bindings/example.ys\fR).

.PP
The library exports 6 functions: \fBfactorial\fR, \fBgreet\fR, \fBrepeat_string\fR,
\fBshout_it\fR, \fBmaybe\fR, and \fBsort_json_array\fR\&.

.PP
Supported languages:
Ada, C, C++, C#, Crystal, D, Dart, Delphi, Fortran, Go, Haskell,
Java, Julia, Lua, Nim, Node.js, Perl, Python, Raku, Ruby, Rust, V,
Zig

.EX
# Build the shared library and run all 23 language bindings
make test-so-bindings

# Run a single language binding
make -C demo/so-bindings/python run
.EE

.SH Go Interface Interop
Gloat supports hybrid builds where a handwritten Go shim implements a Go
interface and delegates all logic to compiled Clojure code via
\fBglj.Var("ns", "fn").Invoke(...)\fR\&.

.PP
The \fBdemo/interop/bubbletea/\fR directory
shows this pattern using Bubbletea,
a Go TUI framework.
Bubbletea requires implementing the \fBtea.Model\fR interface, which Glojure cannot
do directly (no \fBdeftype\fR/\fBreify\fR).
The solution: a small \fBshim.go\fR implements \fBtea.Model\fR and calls Clojure
functions for \fBinit-model\fR, \fBupdate-model\fR, and \fBview-model\fR\&.

.EX
cd demo/interop/bubbletea
make build
\&./picker
.EE

.SH Installation
.SS One-Line Installer
Install gloat to \fB~/.local\fR with a single command:

.EX
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) install
.EE

.PP
This clones the gloat repository to \fB~/.local/share/gloat\fR, creates a symlink
at \fB~/.local/bin/gloat\fR, and installs all dependencies automatically.

.PP
Make sure \fB~/.local/bin\fR is in your \fBPATH\fR, then run \fBgloat --help\fR\&.

.PP
Run \fBmake -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) help\fR to see all available targets.

.EX
# Install to a custom prefix
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) install PREFIX=~/mytools

# Install a specific version
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) install VERSION=v0.1.2

# Also install the glj compiler
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) install-glj

# Uninstall
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) uninstall
.EE

.SS Clone and Setup
Clone this repository and source the appropriate rc file for your shell:

.EX
$ git clone https://github.com/gloathub/gloat

# For Bash, Fish or Zsh
$ source gloat/.rc

$ gloat --help
==> Installing gloat dependencies (bb, glj, go, ys) locally into:

    /home/ingy/src/gloat/worktree/clojure-rewrite/.cache/.local/

Press Enter to continue (or Ctrl-C to cancel)...
\&...installs stuff within the gloat repo dir...

$ man gloat
.EE

.PP
The first time you run the \fBgloat\fR command, all its dependencies will be
installed under the \fB/path/to/gloat/.cache/.local/\fR directory.

.PP
Sourcing the rc file adds \fBgloat\fR to your PATH and automatically loads shell
completions for your shell.

.PP
To make \fBgloat\fR a permanent install, add this to your shell's rc file:

.EX
# For Bash: add to ~/.bashrc
# For Zsh: add to ~/.zshrc
source /absolute/path/to/gloat/.rc

# For Fish: add to ~/.config/fish/config.fish
source /absolute/path/to/gloat/.fishrc
.EE

.SH Output Formats
.TS
allbox;
l l l 
l l l .
\fBFormat\fP	\fBFlag\fP	\fBDescription\fP
\fBbin\fR	\fB-t bin\fR or no extension	Native executable (default)
\fBclj\fR	\fB-t clj\fR	Clojure source
\fBbb\fR	\fB-t bb\fR	Babashka self-contained script
\fBglj\fR	\fB-t glj\fR	Glojure source
\fBgo\fR	\fB-t go\fR	Go source
\fBdir\fR	\fB-o path/\fR	Portable Go project directory
\fBlib\fR	\fB\&.so\fR or \fB\&.dylib\fR extension	Shared library
\fBwasm\fR	\fB\&.wasm\fR extension	WebAssembly (WASI)
\fBjs\fR	\fB-t js\fR with \fB\&.wasm\fR	WebAssembly (JavaScript)
.TE

.PP
The output format is inferred from the \fB-o\fR extension, or can be explicitly
set with \fB-t\fR\&.

.SH Directory Output
When outputting to a directory (\fB-o build/\fR), gloat generates a self-contained
Go project that builds with zero pre-installed dependencies:

.EX
build/
├── Makefile           # Makes-based build (auto-installs Go)
├── go.mod             # Go module definition
├── main.go            # Entry point
└── pkg/app/core/      # Glojure runtime code
.EE

.PP
Anyone can build it with just \fBmake\fR - Go is automatically installed.

.SH Cross-Compilation
Use \fB--platform=OS/ARCH\fR to cross-compile for different platforms:

.EX
# Linux targets
gloat app.ys -o app-linux-amd64 --platform=linux/amd64
gloat app.ys -o app-linux-arm64 --platform=linux/arm64

# macOS targets
gloat app.ys -o app-darwin-amd64 --platform=darwin/amd64
gloat app.ys -o app-darwin-arm64 --platform=darwin/arm64

# Windows targets
gloat app.ys -o app.exe --platform=windows/amd64
gloat app.ys -o app-win-arm64.exe --platform=windows/arm64

# WebAssembly targets
gloat app.ys -o app.wasm --platform=wasip1/wasm    # WASI
gloat app.ys -o app.wasm --platform=js/wasm        # JavaScript
.EE

.PP
Common platform targets:

.TS
allbox;
l l 
l l .
\fBOS\fP	\fBArchitectures\fP
\fBlinux\fR	\fBamd64\fR, \fBarm64\fR, \fB386\fR, \fBarm\fR
\fBdarwin\fR	\fBamd64\fR, \fBarm64\fR
\fBwindows\fR	\fBamd64\fR, \fBarm64\fR, \fBarm\fR, \fB386\fR
\fBfreebsd\fR	\fBamd64\fR, \fBarm64\fR, \fB386\fR
\fBopenbsd\fR	\fBamd64\fR, \fBarm64\fR
\fBnetbsd\fR	\fBamd64\fR, \fBarm64\fR
\fBwasip1\fR	\fBwasm\fR
\fBjs\fR	\fBwasm\fR
.TE

.PP
Less common platform architectures:

.TS
allbox;
l l 
l l .
\fBOS\fP	\fBArchitectures\fP
\fBlinux\fR	\fBppc64le\fR, \fBs390x\fR, \fBriscv64\fR, \fBmips64le\fR
\fBdragonfly\fR	\fBamd64\fR
.TE

.SH Extensions
Extensions add post-compilation processing steps.
Enable them with \fB-X\fR (or \fB--ext\fR):

.EX
gloat app.ys -o app.js -Xhtml
gloat app.ys -o app.wasm -Xprune,gzip
.EE

.PP
Multiple extensions can be combined with commas, and some accept a
value with \fB=\fR:

.EX
gloat app.ys -o app.js -Xserve,html=100
.EE

.PP
Run \fBgloat --extensions\fR to list all available extensions.

.SS brotli
Compress WASM output with Brotli
(auto-installed if needed).
Applies to \fBwasm\fR and \fBjs\fR output formats.

.EX
gloat app.ys -o app.wasm -Xbrotli
.EE

.SS deps
Print the dependency graph of the compiled program (implies \fBprune\fR).
With no value, prints a flat list; with \fB=tree\fR, prints a tree.

.EX
gloat app.ys -o app -Xdeps          # Flat list
gloat app.ys -o app -Xdeps=tree     # Tree view
.EE

.SS gzip
Compress WASM output with gzip (requires \fBgzip\fR on PATH).
Applies to \fBwasm\fR and \fBjs\fR output formats.

.EX
gloat app.ys -o app.wasm -Xgzip
.EE

.SS html
Generate a self-contained HTML page for running a JS/WASM module in
the browser.
Only valid with \fBjs\fR format (\fB-o app.js\fR).

.EX
gloat app.ys -o app.js -Xhtml
gloat app.ys -o app.js -Xhtml='arg1 arg2'
.EE

.PP
This generates \fBapp.html\fR alongside \fBapp.js\fR, with the Go WASM
runtime (\fBwasm_exec.js\fR) inlined.
After generation, gloat prints the command to serve locally.

.PP
.RS

.PP
\fBNote:\fP \fBfetch()\fR requires HTTP, not \fBfile://\fR, so a local
server is needed to run WASM in the browser.

.RE

.SS open
Open the page in your default browser after starting the server.
Implies \fB-Xserve\fR (which implies \fB-Xhtml\fR).
Only valid with \fBjs\fR format.

.EX
gloat app.ys -o app.js -Xopen
gloat app.ys -o app.js -Xopen='arg1 arg2'
.EE

.PP
The implication chain: \fB-Xopen\fR → \fB-Xserve\fR → \fB-Xhtml\fR\&.

.SS prune
Prune unused \fBclojure.core\fR and YAMLScript runtime functions from
the compiled output, producing smaller binaries.
Applies to binary builds (\fBbin\fR, \fBlib\fR, \fBwasm\fR, \fBjs\fR, \fBdir\fR).

.EX
gloat app.ys -o app -Xprune
gloat app.ys -o app.wasm -Xprune
.EE

.SS serve
Start a local HTTP server after building.
Implies \fB-Xhtml\fR\&.
Only valid with \fBjs\fR format.

.EX
gloat app.ys -o app.js -Xserve
gloat app.ys -o app.js -Xserve='arg1 arg2'
.EE

.PP
Without explicit \fB-Xhtml\fR, the HTML page is served from a temporary
directory so the output directory is left clean.
With \fB-Xserve,html\fR, the HTML is generated alongside the output.

.SH Options
.EX
-t, --to ...     Output format (inferred from -o; see --formats)
-o, --out ...    Output file or directory

--platform ...   Cross-compile (e.g., linux/amd64; see --platforms)
-X, --ext ...    Enable a processing extension (see --extensions)

--ns ...         Override namespace
--module ...     Go module name (e.g., github.com/user/project)

--formats        List available output formats
--extensions     List available processing extensions
--platforms      List available cross-compilation platforms

--repl[=dir]     Start the Glojure REPL (optional build directory)
--deps=file      Path to gljdeps.edn for --repl (also accepts /dev/fd/N)

--shell          Start a sub-shell or run a command (-- cmd...)
--shell-all      Like --shell but install all dev tools
--complete ...   Generate shell completion script (bash, fish, zsh)

-r, --run        Compile and run (pass program args after --)
-f, --force      Overwrite existing output files
-v, --verbose    Print timing for each compilation step
-q, --quiet      Suppress progress messages

--upgrade        Upgrade gloat to the latest version
--reset          Remove all cached dependencies and reinstall

-h, --help       Show this help
--version        Show version
.EE

.SH Shell Completion
Gloat provides tab completion for all shells.
Completions are automatically loaded when you source \fB\&.rc\fR (bash/zsh) or
\fB\&.fishrc\fR (fish).

.PP
To manually generate or reload completions:

.EX
# Bash
eval "$(gloat --complete=bash)"

# Zsh
eval "$(gloat --complete=zsh)"

# Fish
gloat --complete=fish | source
.EE

.PP
Completions provide:
- All command-line options (short and long forms)
- Available values for \fB--to\fR (output formats)
- Available values for \fB--platform\fR (cross-compilation targets)
- Available values for \fB--ext\fR (processing extensions)
- File completion for source files (\fB\&.ys\fR, \fB\&.clj\fR, \fB\&.glj\fR)
- File completion for \fB--out\fR output paths
- Directory completion for \fB--repl\fR build directory
- File completion for \fB--deps\fR (\fB\&.edn\fR files)

.SH The Gloat Shell
The Makefile is set up so that you don't need to install any dependencies.
They get installed the first time they are needed by a rule invoked by a \fBmake\fR
command that you run.

.PP
However, these tools are only accessible inside the Makefile; to the rules that
get run when you use \fBmake\fR commands.
In other words, they are NOT available for you to run directly in your shell.

.PP
Sometimes you want to run these commands like \fBgo\fR, \fBglj\fR, \fBys\fR and \fBbb\fR
directly in your shell.
Gloat provides two shell variants:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBgloat --shell\fR — Starts a subshell with the core tools (bb, glj, go, ys)
plus \fBwasmtime\fR on PATH.
This is the everyday variant for compiling and running programs.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBgloat --shell-all\fR — Like \fB--shell\fR but also installs all developer tools
(gh, go-md2man, shellcheck, brotli, etc.).
Use this when you need the full development environment.

.PP
Your shell prompt will be prefixed with \fB(gloat)\fR so that you know you are in
the subshell.

.PP
To leave this environment and get back to the shell that you started in, just
press Ctrl-D or run the \fBexit\fR command.

.PP
Both variants also support running a single command without starting an
interactive shell, using \fB--\fR followed by the command:

.EX
# Run a command string via bash -c (single argument)
gloat --shell -- 'glj --version'

# Run a command with separate arguments (direct exec)
gloat --shell -- glj --version

# Use --shell-all for commands that need dev tools
gloat --shell-all -- go-md2man --help
.EE

.SH The Glojure REPL
\fBgloat --repl\fR starts an interactive Glojure
REPL with full access to Go packages.

.EX
gloat --repl            # Start REPL (auto-detects ./gljdeps.edn)
gloat --repl=mydir      # Use mydir/ as the REPL build directory
.EE

.SS REPL Build Directory
The REPL needs a Go module directory to bootstrap dependencies and generate
import glue code.
The build directory is resolved in this priority order:
.IP "  1." 5
\fB--repl=dir\fR — explicit directory
.IP "  2." 5
\fBGLOAT_REPL=dir\fR — environment variable
.IP "  3." 5
\fB\&.\fR (current directory) — when \fB\&./gljdeps.edn\fR is present and no explicit
\fB--deps\fR is given
.IP "  4." 5
\fB\&./gljrepl/\fR — default fallback (created automatically)

.PP
Using \fB\&.\fR keeps all generated files alongside your source, which is convenient
when your project already has a \fBgo.mod\fR and a \fBgljdeps.edn\fR\&.

.PP
\fB\&./gljrepl/\fR must either not exist, or be a directory that was previously
initialized (contains a \fBgo.mod\fR).
Use \fB--force\fR to proceed anyway if it exists without a \fBgo.mod\fR\&.

.SS External Go Dependencies
To make Go packages available in the REPL, declare them in a \fBgljdeps.edn\fR
file:

.EX
{:deps {gopkg.in/yaml.v3      {:mvn/version "v3.0.1"}
        github.com/some/other  {:mvn/version "v1.2.3"}}}
.EE

.PP
The deps file is located via \fB--deps\fR, \fBGLOAT_GLJDEPS\fR, or auto-detection of
\fB\&./gljdeps.edn\fR in the current directory.
Process substitution works too, for one-off experiments:

.EX
gloat --repl --deps=<(echo '{:deps {gopkg.in/yaml.v3 {:mvn/version "v3.0.1"}}}')
.EE

.PP
On first run, \fBglj\fR fetches the declared packages with \fBgo get\fR, generates
import glue code, and re-launches itself with the new packages on the load
path.
Subsequent runs in the same build directory skip the fetch if versions match.

.SH Advanced Configuration
.SS Resetting Dependencies
If your cached dependencies become corrupted or you want a clean reinstall,
run:

.EX
gloat --reset
.EE

.PP
This runs \fBmake distclean\fR, removing the \fB\&.cache/\fR directory.
The next invocation of gloat will reinstall all dependencies from scratch.

.SS Building Glojure from Source
By default, gloat downloads a pre-built \fBglj\fR binary from GitHub releases.
If a pre-built binary is not available for your platform, or you need to test
unreleased Glojure changes, you can build \fBglj\fR from source.

.PP
Set \fBGLOJURE_FROM_SOURCE\fR as an environment variable:

.EX
export GLOJURE_FROM_SOURCE=true
.EE

.SH Environment Variables
.TS
allbox;
l l 
l l .
\fBVariable\fP	\fBDescription\fP
\fBGLOAT_GLJDEPS\fR	Path to a \fBgljdeps.edn\fR file for \fB--repl\fR\&. Equivalent to \fB--deps=\fR\&.
\fBGLOAT_MODULE\fR	T{
Go module name for compiled output. Equivalent to \fB--module\fR\&.
T}
\fBGLOAT_NAMESPACE\fR	T{
Namespace override for compiled output. Equivalent to \fB--ns\fR\&.
T}
\fBGLOAT_REPL\fR	Default build directory for \fB--repl\fR\&. Overridden by \fB--repl=dir\fR\&.
\fBGLOAT_SHELL\fR	Preferred shell for \fB--shell\fR when the parent shell cannot be detected (default: \fBbash\fR).
\fBGLOAT_X_PRUNE\fR	T{
Set to any non-empty value to enable the \fBprune\fR extension without \fB-Xprune\fR\&.
T}
.TE

.SH Copyright and License
Copyright 2026 - Ingy dot Net

.PP
MIT License - See License file.
