'\" t
.nh
.TH gloat-go-interop -- Calling Go from Glojure
.SH Synopsis
Gloat compiles Glojure (a Clojure dialect) to Go.
Every Go package that the compiler has been linked against is therefore
visible from Glojure code, and every value flows end-to-end as its
natural Go type.
The standard library is always available.
Third-party Go packages become available when they are declared in a
\fBgljdeps.edn\fR file (see gloat-repl for using deps from
the REPL).

.PP
The interop surface is small and looks a lot like Clojure's Java interop.
Package functions are called as if they were Glojure functions
(\fBfmt.Sprintf\fR, \fBstrings.Split\fR).
Methods, struct fields, and constructors use the dot (\fB\&.\fR), \fBset!\fR, and
\fBnew\fR forms.
A reflection escape hatch is available for anything the higher-level
forms cannot reach.

.PP
The following short program touches a package function, a method, a
field, and a constructor.
Everything else in this page is variations on these four moves.

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (println (fmt.Sprintf "Hello, %s!" "world"))
  (println (strings.HasPrefix "foobar" "foo"))
  (let [parts (strings.Split "alpha,beta,gamma" ",")]
    (println (strings.Join parts " | "))))
.EE

.PP
To experiment with interop interactively, start the REPL with
\fBgloat --repl\fR; see gloat-repl for how to load
third-party Go packages via \fBgljdeps.edn\fR\&.

.SH Calling Go Package Functions
Runnable: \fB01-hello-package-fn.clj\fR

.PP
A Go package function is called with the form \fB(pkg.Function args...)\fR\&.
The compiler resolves the identifier directly to the package's exported
function, so there is no \fBimport\fR form to write and no aliasing step.
Glojure values cross the boundary as their natural Go counterparts:
strings as \fBstring\fR, longs as \fBint64\fR, vectors flow into slice
parameters, and so on.

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (println (fmt.Sprintf "Hello, %s!" "world"))
  (println (strings.HasPrefix "foobar" "foo"))
  (let [parts (strings.Split "alpha,beta,gamma" ",")]
    (println (strings.Join parts " | "))))
.EE

.PP
The package portion of the name is a Go import path.
For short paths (\fBfmt\fR, \fBstrings\fR, \fBbytes\fR, \fBregexp\fR) you write them
verbatim.
For paths that contain a \fB/\fR, replace the slashes with \fB:\fR in Glojure
code: \fBnet:http.Server\fR, \fBnet:url.Parse\fR, \fBcrypto:sha256.Sum256\fR\&.
Fully-qualified module paths use the same separator throughout.

.EX
(throw (github.com:gloathub:glojure:pkg:lang.NewError "boom"))
.EE

.PP
A Glojure function can be passed wherever Go expects a function value.
The compiler generates a Go closure that calls back into the Glojure
runtime, so higher-order Go APIs work the same as Clojure ones.

.PP
Runnable: \fB02-fn-into-go-hof.clj\fR

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (let [parts (strings.FieldsFunc
                "alpha,beta;gamma|delta"
                (fn [c] (contains? #{\\, \\; \\|} (char c))))]
    (doseq [p parts]
      (println " -" p))))
.EE

.SH Packages Are Linked, Not Imported
Glojure has no per-file form for pulling in a Go package.
There is no \fB(:import ...)\fR clause for Go types, no \fB(:require ... :as
alias)\fR for Go packages, and no way to give a Go package a local short
name that applies only to the current file.
A Go package is either linked into the binary (in which case every name
inside it is callable from anywhere) or it is not.

.PP
What you \fIdo\fP still write is the standard Clojure \fBns\fR form for Glojure
namespaces:

.EX
(ns main.core
  (:require [clojure.string :as str]))
.EE

.PP
That \fB:require\fR only affects Glojure namespaces.
Go packages are addressed directly by their import path everywhere they
are used, with \fB/\fR rewritten as \fB:\fR (see \fBCalling Go Package
Functions\fP above).

.PP
The Go standard library is always linked.
Third-party Go packages are declared in a \fBgljdeps.edn\fR file that sits
next to the program being run; the compiler reads it, fetches the
modules with \fBgo get\fR, and links the listed packages into the resulting
binary.

.PP
A minimal \fBgljdeps.edn\fR:

.EX
{:deps {github.com:google:uuid {:mvn/version "v1.6.0"}}}
.EE

.PP
The key is a Glojure symbol naming the Go import path, written in the
same colon-separated form used at call sites.
The deps loader rewrites \fB:\fR back to \fB/\fR before handing the path to
\fBgo get\fR, so this entry resolves to the module \fBgithub.com/google/uuid\fR\&.
The slash form (\fBgithub.com/google/uuid\fR) is also accepted at the
deps-key level, but at call sites you must use the colon form because
the dot in a multi-slash slash form would parse as a host expression.
Stick with the colon form everywhere for consistency.

.PP
A program that uses it (saved next to the deps file):

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (let [id (github.com:google:uuid.New)]
    (println "Generated UUID:" (.String id))))
.EE

.PP
Running it:

.EX
$ gloat --run greet.glj
Generated UUID: 69e566b7-f49c-4302-a11f-808ebcd96112
.EE

.PP
All compile modes (including \fBgloat --run\fR and binary builds) and the
REPL look for \fBgljdeps.edn\fR the same way: an explicit \fB--deps=path\fR
takes precedence, then \fBGLOAT_GLJDEPS\fR from the environment, then a
\fBgljdeps.edn\fR in the current working directory.
See gloat-repl for REPL specifics.
First launch fetches each module; subsequent launches reuse the cache.

.PP
If a fully-qualified path is unwieldy at the call site, give it a
local short name with \fBdef\fR:

.EX
(def uuid-new github.com:google:uuid.New)

(defn -main []
  (println "Generated UUID:" (.String (uuid-new))))
.EE

.PP
This is a plain Glojure binding, not a package alias; it lives in the
current namespace and does not affect resolution anywhere else.

.SH Methods on Values
Runnable: \fB03-method-call.clj\fR

.PP
Method calls use the dot form, identical to Clojure's Java interop.
Both shapes are supported and produce the same code:

.EX
(. instance Method args...)
(. instance (Method args...))
.EE

.PP
The grouped form (parens around the method call) is easier to read in
nested or chained expressions; the flat form is shorter for one-shot
calls.
Pick whichever reads better in context.
Zero-argument methods take neither parens nor args.

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (let [escaper (strings.NewReplacer "<" "&lt;" ">" "&gt;")]
    (println (. escaper (Replace "<html>")))
    (println (. escaper Replace "the <header> tag")))
  (println "Len of empty Buffer:" (. (new bytes.Buffer) Len)))
.EE

.PP
Pointer and value receivers are not distinguished at the call site.
\fBnew\fR returns \fB*T\fR (see below), and method lookup walks both the
pointer and value method sets, so calling either kind of method just
works.

.SH Reading and Writing Struct Fields
Runnable: \fB04-fields-and-set.clj\fR

.PP
The same dot form reads exported struct fields.
There is no separate \fB\&.-field\fR form; the compiler decides whether the
member is a field or a method by looking at the type.

.EX
(. instance FieldName)
.EE

.PP
To assign a field, wrap the field-read in \fBset!\fR:

.EX
(set! (. instance FieldName) value)
.EE

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (let [srv (new net:http.Server)]
    (println "Addr before:" (pr-str (. srv Addr)))
    (set! (. srv Addr) ":8080")
    (println "Addr after: " (pr-str (. srv Addr)))))
.EE

.PP
Field types must match.
Assigning an \fBint64\fR to a \fBtime.Duration\fR field will not coerce; cast
first with \fB(time.Duration ...)\fR or build the value through the package
that owns the type.

.PP
One gotcha: if a field's type is itself a function, reading the field
with the dot form invokes it.
To inspect a function-typed field without calling it, drop to
\fBreflect\fR (see \fBReflection Escape Hatch\fP).

.SH Constructing Values with \fBnew\fR
Runnable: \fB05-new-and-init.clj\fR

.PP
\fBnew\fR returns a fresh, zero-valued pointer to a Go type.

.EX
(new pkg.Type)        ;; => *pkg.Type, all fields zero
.EE

.PP
Initialise the struct by writing its fields with \fBset!\fR:

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (let [srv (new net:http.Server)]
    (set! (. srv Addr)           "localhost:8080")
    (set! (. srv MaxHeaderBytes) (int (* 1024 16)))
    (println "Addr:          " (. srv Addr))
    (println "MaxHeaderBytes:" (. srv MaxHeaderBytes))))
.EE

.PP
Where a struct field expects a function-typed interface value (the
canonical example is \fBnet/http.Handler\fR), wrap a Glojure fn in the
package's \fB*Func\fR adapter
(see \fB06-handler-func-wrap.clj\fR):

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn handler [w r]
  (. w (WriteHeader 200)))

(defn -main []
  (let [srv (new net:http.Server)]
    (set! (. srv Addr)    "localhost:8080")
    (set! (. srv Handler) (net:http.HandlerFunc handler))
    (let [field (.FieldByName (.Elem (reflect.ValueOf srv)) "Handler")]
      (println "Addr:    " (. srv Addr))
      (println "Handler: " (if (.IsNil field) "nil" "<set>")))))
.EE

.PP
\fBnet/http.HandlerFunc\fR is a Go type whose conversion \fBT(f)\fR adapts a
plain function into the \fBhttp.Handler\fR interface.
Calling it on a Glojure fn produces a value the field will accept.
Construction of non-pointer struct literals and direct assembly of
typed slices and maps from Glojure values are limited; see
\fBKnown Limits\fP\&.

.SH Multiple Return Values
Runnable: \fB07-multi-return.clj\fR

.PP
Go functions that return more than one value come back to Glojure as a
vector.
Destructure the vector at the binding site to name each return:

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (let [[n   err]  (strconv.Atoi "42")
        [n2  err2] (strconv.Atoi "not-a-number")]
    (println "good input ->" n "  err:" err)
    (println "bad input  ->" n2 "  err:" err2)
    (when (some? err2)
      (println "  error message:" (.Error err2)))))
.EE

.PP
A \fBnil\fR error is the success case, matching Go convention.
Test for failure with \fB(some? err)\fR or by truthiness.
The error value is a Go \fBerror\fR; call \fB(.Error err)\fR to get the
message string.

.PP
A common idiomatic shape is to throw on error and keep going:

.EX
(let [[n err] (strconv.Atoi s)]
  (when err (throw err))
  n)
.EE

.SH Collections: Slices, Arrays, Maps
Runnable: \fB08-slice-of-byte.clj\fR

.PP
Go types do not exist as Glojure literals.
To construct or cast to a Go collection type, use the type-builder
functions in the \fBgo/\fR namespace.

.TS
allbox;
l l 
l l .
\fBBuilder\fP	\fBResult type\fP
\fB(go/slice-of T)\fR	\fB[]T\fR
\fB(go/array-of N T)\fR	\fB[N]T\fR
\fB(go/map-of K V)\fR	\fBmap[K]V\fR
\fB(go/ptr-to T)\fR	\fB*T\fR
.TE

.PP
Each builder returns a \fBreflect.Type\fR\&.
Applied like a function, it constructs or converts a value:

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (let [bs       ((go/slice-of go/byte) "foo----bar")
        [m err]  (regexp.Match "foo.*bar" bs)]
    (println "bytes count:" (count bs))
    (println "matched?    " m)
    (println "err:        " err)))
.EE

.PP
\fBgo/byte\fR, \fBgo/int\fR, \fBgo/string\fR, \fBgo/int64\fR, and so on are the
built-in type values you pass to a builder.

.PP
To allocate a fresh zero-value of any Go type, use \fBgo/make\fR:

.EX
(let [m (go/make (go/map-of go/string go/int))]
  ...)
.EE

.PP
Constructing a Go slice or map directly from a Glojure vector or map
literal is not yet supported through the type builders for every type.
Build incrementally, or use a Go helper.

.SH Reflection Escape Hatch
Runnable: \fB09-reflect-escape.clj\fR

.PP
A handful of Go features (function-typed field reads, channel
operations, dynamic field lookup, unexported behaviour, anything that
needs a \fBreflect.Type\fR at runtime) are not yet reachable through the
higher-level forms.
For those, drop to the \fBreflect\fR package directly.
The pattern is:
.IP "  1." 5
\fBreflect.ValueOf\fR to get a \fBreflect.Value\fR for any Go value.
.IP "  2." 5
\fB(.Elem v)\fR to dereference a pointer.
.IP "  3." 5
\fB(.FieldByName e "Name")\fR, \fB(.MethodByName e "Name")\fR, \fB(.Index e 0)\fR,
\fB(.MapIndex e k)\fR to navigate.
.IP "  4." 5
\fB(.Interface f)\fR to escape back to a Glojure value, or \fB\&.Set\fR to
write.

.PP
The example below reads three fields of an HTTP server by name,
including the function-typed \fBHandler\fR field that the dot form cannot
inspect:

.EX
(ns main.core)

(defn -main []
  (let [srv  (new net:http.Server)
        _    (set! (. srv Addr) "localhost:8080")
        elem (.Elem (reflect.ValueOf srv))]
    (doseq [name ["Addr" "MaxHeaderBytes" "Handler"]]
      (let [f (.FieldByName elem name)]
        (println name "->" (.Interface f))))))
.EE

.PP
The same pattern works for channels (\fB\&.Send\fR, \fB\&.Recv\fR), tagged unions
hidden behind unexported types, and any other corner that does not yet
have a first-class Glojure form.
Treat it as a temporary bridge; high-traffic uses can usually be
factored into a small Go helper exposed as a normal package function.

.SH Known Limits
The forms above cover the common ground.
A few things look like they should work but do not, or do not yet:
.IP \(bu 2
\fB\fBnew\fR with keyword arguments\fP is recognised in the interpreter but
silently ignored by the compiler.
Write \fB(new pkg.Type)\fR followed by \fBset!\fR for each field.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBNon-pointer struct construction\fP is not exposed.
\fBnew\fR always returns a pointer; use \fB(.Elem ...)\fR if you need the
value form via reflection.
.IP \(bu 2
\fB\fBdefer\fR and \fBrecover\fR\fP have no Glojure form yet.
Use \fBtry\fR/\fBfinally\fR for the cleanup case; for \fBrecover\fR semantics,
catch the panic in a Go helper.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBAddress-of (\fB&\fR) and pointer dereference (\fB*\fR)\fP have no syntax of
their own.
\fBnew\fR covers most pointer needs; \fBgo/deref\fR (and reflection) covers
the rest.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBThe blank identifier \fB_\fR\fP has no equivalent in destructuring.
Bind a name you do not use, or pick one that documents the intent
(\fB[v _err]\fR).
.IP \(bu 2
\fBImplementing an arbitrary Go interface from Glojure\fP is supported
only when the package ships a function-typed adapter (the
\fBnet/http.HandlerFunc\fR pattern).
For other interfaces, write a small Go shim.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBBuilding Go maps and slices from Glojure literals\fP through the
type builders is partial.
Use \fBgo/make\fR and populate with reflection, or build the value in Go
and return it.

.PP
These are gaps in the current Glojure compiler, not language
decisions; expect them to shrink over time.

.PP
Runnable copies of each example on this page live under
\fBdemo/interop/go-interop/\fR
in the gloat repository.
Try them with \fBgloat --run path/to/file.clj\fR\&.
