.nh
.TH gloat-install -- Installing Gloat
Gloat has \fBzero dependencies\fP - everything installs automatically on first
use.

.PP
There are two main ways to get started: cloning the repository and sourcing
the \fB\&.rc\fR file (recommended), or the one-line installer.

.SH Clone and Setup (Recommended)
For Bash, Fish or Zsh:

.EX
git clone https://github.com/gloathub/gloat
source gloat/.rc
gloat --help
.EE

.PP
The \fBsource gloat/.rc\fR command adds the \fBgloat\fR command to your PATH, enables
the \fBman gloat\fR help and sets up \fBgloat\fR tab completion.

.PP
On first run, Gloat will automatically install all required tools (Go, Glojure,
YAMLScript, Babashka, etc) to \fB\&.cache/local/\fR within the project directory.
Just run \fBgloat --help\fR once to complete the setup.

.PP
To make Gloat available permanently, simply add this to your shell's rc file
(\fB~/.bashrc\fR, \fB~/.config/fish/config.fish\fR or \fB~/.zshrc\fR):

.EX
source /path/to/gloat/.rc
.EE

.PP
Yes, that command and \fB\&.rc\fR file actually supports all three shells!

.SH One-Line Installer
Install \fBgloat\fR (or \fBglj\fR) to \fB~/.local/bin/\fR with a single command:

.EX
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) install
.EE

.PP
Installing \fBgloat\fR clones the gloat repository to \fB~/.local/share/gloat\fR,
creates a symlink at \fB~/.local/bin/gloat\fR, and installs all the required
dependencies automatically.

.PP
The installer refuses to run if \fB~/.local/bin\fR is not on your \fBPATH\fR —
add \fBexport PATH=~/.local/bin:$PATH\fR to your shell rc and start a new
shell, or pass \fBPREFIX=/path/to\fR where \fB/path/to/bin\fR is already on your
\fBPATH\fR\&. Then run \fBgloat --help\fR\&.

.PP
\fBOptions:\fP

.EX
# Install to a custom prefix
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) install PREFIX=~/.gloat

# Install a specific version
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) install VERSION=v0.1.37

# Also install the Glojure glj (prebuilt binary) command
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) install-glj

# Uninstall
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) uninstall
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) uninstall-glj

# Show the installer Makefile rules:
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) help
.EE

.PP
On success the installer prints the exact \fBsource .../share/gloat/.rc\fR
line to add to your shell rc — this gives the one-line install the same
man-page support and shell completion as the clone method.

.PP
Pass \fBVERSION=v1.2.3\fR to pin to a specific gloat release; the installer
also picks up the GLJ version that pairs with that gloat tag.

.SH Upgrading
Upgrade gloat to the latest release:

.EX
gloat --upgrade
.EE

.PP
Pin (or roll back) to a specific version:

.EX
gloat --upgrade=v1.2.3
.EE

.PP
In both cases, gloat will:
.IP "  1." 5
Switch the local checkout to the target tag.
.IP "  2." 5
Remove \fB\&.cache/\fR so all dependencies (including the GLJ version paired
with that gloat release) reinstall fresh on the next run.
.IP "  3." 5
Print what to expect — the next \fBgloat\fR invocation kicks off a quiet
per-tool install.

.PP
If your clone has uncommitted changes, \fB--upgrade\fR will refuse and ask you
to stash or commit them first.

.PP
If you installed via the one-line installer, the checkout under
\fB~/.local/share/gloat\fR is detached-HEAD and upgrading there always works.

.SH Resetting the Cache
If something gets stuck or you want to force a fresh dependency install
without changing version:

.EX
gloat --reset
.EE

.PP
This removes \fB\&.cache/\fR entirely (binaries, build artifacts, REPL working
dirs). The next \fBgloat\fR invocation reinstalls everything.

.SH Uninstalling
If you used the one-line installer:

.EX
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) uninstall
make -f <(curl -sL gloathub.org/make) uninstall-glj   # if you installed glj
.EE

.PP
This removes the \fBgloat\fR symlink from \fB~/.local/bin\fR and the cloned tree
from \fB~/.local/share/gloat\fR (use \fBPREFIX=...\fR if you installed to a custom
prefix). After uninstalling, remove the \fBsource .../.rc\fR line you added to
your shell rc, or new shells will fail to start.

.PP
If you used the clone method, uninstalling is just removing the clone and
the \fBsource\fR line:

.EX
rm -rf /path/to/gloat
# Then remove the `source /path/to/gloat/.rc` line from your shell rc.
.EE
